### Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project

# Analysis of Accelerometer Data

This repository contains files for the final project of the [Getting and Cleaning Data](https://www.coursera.org/learn/data-cleaning) course on Coursera. The assignment for this project was to transform, tidy, and analyze a supplied dataset and generate a summary of the data.

## Data Source

The data for this analysis are the [UCI Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Data Set](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones). In order to run the script, download and extract the `UCI HAR Dataset` folder to the current working directory.

Data were measured from **30 subjects** each conducting **six activities**: walking, walking upstairs, walking downstairs, sitting, standing, and laying. For each combination of subject and activity, several sets of measurements were taken, and from each of these sets of raw data, the researchers calculated 561 features (listed in `features.txt` in the UCI HAR Dataset). There are **10,299 total subject-activity observations** represented in this data set.

## Code Books

The original code book for the data is the `README.txt` file found in the `UCI HAR Dataset` folder. Further information on how the features were calculated can be found in the `features_info.txt` file, also found in the `UCI HAR Dataset` folder.

Modifications to the original data set as a part of this final project are detailed in the [CodeBook.md](CodeBook.md) file found in this repository.

## Running the Analysis

The [run_analysis.R](run_analysis.R) script runs an analysis on the UCI HAR Dataset and produces a summary of the mean and standard deviation data for each calculated feature. The script assumes that the UCI HAR Dataset has been download and extracted to the current working directory.

The script extracts the means and standard deviations for each of the observations, then finds the mean value for each (mean of means and mean of standard deviations) by subject and by activity. These mean values are reported in the [avg_mean_sd_per_subject_activity.txt](avg_mean_sd_per_subject_activity.txt) file generated by this script (included in this repository.)

If the script is sourced into an R Console, two R objects will be created: `obs_mean_sd`, a data table containing the non-summarized mean and standard deviation data; and `obs_summary`, a data table containing the summarized data (equivalent to avg_mean_sd_per_subject_activity.txt).

## Mean and Standard Deviation Rationale

The assignment description instructed that the script 

> Extract only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement.

I included every variable from the original dataset that contained `mean()` or `std()` in its name.

## Tidy Data Rationale

As Hadley Wickham [defines the principles of Tidy Data](https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v059i10/), he explains that 

> A general rule of thumb is that it is easier to describe functional relationships between variables... than between rows, and it is easier to make comparisons between groups of observations... than between groups of columns.

For this dataset, the means and standard deviations presented were all generated from the same set of raw data using various formulas and transformations. Because these means and standard deviations were calculated from the same underlying set of raw data, they do not exist independently of each other and should be represented as columns of variables with a functional relationship to one another. 

The rows of observations are represented by the test subject's ID number and the activity they were performing; it makes sense to compare the means and standard deviations calculated for an observation within the same subject and activity, among different subjects, and/or among different activities.